# Compilers Project

**GROUP:** 6c

 
NAME1: Diogo Santos, NR1: 201806878, GRADE1: 17, CONTRIBUTION1: 25%  
NAME2: José Eduardo Henriques, NR2: 201806372, GRADE2: 16, CONTRIBUTION2: 25%  
NAME3: Mariana Soares, NR3: 201605775, GRADE3: 16, CONTRIBUTION3: 25%  
NAME4: Muriel Pinho, NR4: 201700132, GRADE4: 17, CONTRIBUTION4: 25%  

 

GLOBAL Grade of the project: 17

 

**SUMMARY:** Parsing of a text file to an AST; Grammar reconstruction to remove left recursion and LOOKAHEAD=1 convertion; Syntactic analysis and error handling; Generation of a symbol table; Semantic analysis and error detection; OLLIR code generation; Jasmin code generation;

 



**DEALING WITH SYNTACTIC ERRORS:** Analysis of the 'WhileExpression', with a tolerance of 10 errors. In this case, when the error is detected, everything inside the 'WhileExpression' is skipped and continues the code processing. No error tolerance for any other cases.

 


**SEMANTIC ANALYSIS:** 'MethodInvocation' checks if its invoker is valid and if the correct parameter types are being used; 'Assignment checks if the expression is valid and the return type is the same as its left side operator; 'ArrayIndex' and 'ConstructorIntArray' check if inside [] there is a number, an int variable or a method invocation that returns an integer; 'IfExpression' and 'WhileExpression' check if its expression returns a boolean value; 'Length' checks if its invoker is an int array. As an additional feature, method overloads are allowed.

 


**CODE GENERATION:** From the root node, recursive method calls to generate OLLIR code for each child node, using the symbol table as a reference for imported classes and method names/return types. (jasmin)

 


**TASK DISTRIBUTION:**
- Diogo Santos: AST parsing, grammar conversion for LL(1) including operator precedence, left-side recursion elimination, syntatic errors, semantic analysis, symbol table
- José Eduardo: AST parsing, semantic analysis, OLLIR generation
- Mariana Soares: AST parsing, grammar conversion for LL(1) including operator precedence, OLLIR code generation
- Muriel Pinho: Semantic analysis, Jasmin code generation

 


**PROS:** Method overloads allowed; Correct error handling. Clean OLLIR code identation.

 


**CONS:** No optimizations implemented. Minor bugs in method invocations of imported classes (OLLIR) and in array indexing (Jasmin).



For this project, you need to [install Gradle](https://gradle.org/install/)

## Project setup

Copy your ``.jjt`` file to the ``javacc`` folder. If you change any of the classes generated by ``jjtree`` or ``javacc``, you also need to copy them to the ``javacc`` folder.

Copy your source files to the ``src`` folder, and your JUnit test files to the ``test`` folder.

## Compile

To compile the program, run ``gradle build``. This will compile your classes to ``classes/main/java`` and copy the JAR file to the root directory. The JAR file will have the same name as the repository folder.

### Run

To run you have two options: Run the ``.class`` files or run the JAR.

### Run ``.class``

To run the ``.class`` files, do the following:

```cmd
java -cp "./build/classes/java/main/" <class_name> <arguments>
```

Where ``<class_name>`` is the name of the class you want to run and ``<arguments>`` are the arguments to be passed to ``main()``.

### Run ``.jar``

To run the JAR, do the following command:

```cmd
java -jar <jar filename> <arguments>
```

Where ``<jar filename>`` is the name of the JAR file that has been copied to the root folder, and ``<arguments>`` are the arguments to be passed to ``main()``.

## Test

To test the program, run ``gradle test``. This will execute the build, and run the JUnit tests in the ``test`` folder. If you want to see output printed during the tests, use the flag ``-i`` (i.e., ``gradle test -i``).
You can also see a test report by opening ``build/reports/tests/test/index.html``.

## Checkpoint 1
For the first checkpoint the following is required:

1. Convert the provided e-BNF grammar into JavaCC grammar format in a .jj file
2. Resolve grammar conflicts (projects with global LOOKAHEAD > 1 will have a penalty)
3. Proceed with error treatment and recovery mechanisms for the while expression
4. Convert the .jj file into a .jjt file
5. Include missing information in nodes (i.e. tree annotation). E.g. include class name in the class Node.
6. Generate a JSON from the AST

### JavaCC to JSON
To help converting the JavaCC nodes into a JSON format, we included in this project the JmmNode interface, which can be seen in ``src-lib/pt/up/fe/comp/jmm/JmmNode.java``. The idea is for you to use this interface along with your SimpleNode class. Then, one can easily convert the JmmNode into a JSON string by invoking the method JmmNode.toJson().

Please check the SimpleNode included in this repository to see an example of how the interface can be implemented, which implements all methods except for the ones related to node attributes. How you should store the attributes in the node is left as an exercise.

### Reports
We also included in this project the class ``src-lib/pt/up/fe/comp/jmm/report/Report.java``. This class is used to generate important reports, including error and warning messages, but also can be used to include debugging and logging information. E.g. When you want to generate an error, create a new Report with the ``Error`` type and provide the stage in which the error occurred.


### Parser Interface

We have included the interface ``src-lib/pt/up/fe/comp/jmm/JmmParser.java``, which you should implement in a class that has a constructor with no parameters (please check ``src/Main.java`` for an example). This class will be used to test your parser. The interface has a single method, ``parse``, which receives a String with the code to parse, and returns a JmmParserResult instance. This instance contains the root node of your AST, as well as a List of Report instances that you collected during parsing.

To configure the name of the class that implements the JmmParser interface, use the file ``parser.properties``.
